---
layout: post
title:  "Queering or Adhearing - Alice in Wonderland"
date:   2025-11-09 18:35:16 +0000
categories: blog
image: /assets/img/aesthetic.jpg
author: lilah
---
 ##Introduction

Throughout this essay, I will explore how ‘*Alice in Wonderland’ (2010)* is either queering or adhering to typical gender stereotypes and familial roles within British Film, and how my perspective of the film being queering has changed after multiple viewings. I will keep a particular focus on director *Tim Burton* queering typical gender roles in both film genres and across historical time periods and worlds by dissecting the role of Alice as a woman in Victorian society, and interrogating Alice’s role in Wonderland itself.

##Queering Gender Identity

A particularly important factor to consider whilst exploring the idea of queer identity or queering cinema is that “The queer must insist on disturbing” (Edelman). In the case of *Alice in Wonderland*, the time period and setting are key. Set in the Victorian era, gender norms and standards were even more prominent than in modern-day society. In some ways, director *Tim Burton* is able to queer the gender norms effectively. One example is the wardrobe (*Colleen Attwood*) Alice (*Mia Wasikowska*) wears, we see this clearly at the beginning when *Alice* is seen in a dress, although without a corset. She states: “Who’s to say what is proper? What if it was agreed that ‘proper’ was wearing a codfish on your head? To me, wearing a corset is like a codfish.” (2:57-4:30). Here, we immediately see Alice queering gender norms, as she questions the Victorian societal standards. Later, we see Alice in a suit of armour, which again, queers typical gender norms of the hyper-masculine hero. The use of feminine elements within the armour reinforces this narrative, without forcing Alice into the masculine role of the Hollywood hero. However, this rejection of ‘girlieness’ can also be read as a critique of womanhood and those who choose to embrace femininity “She is remarkable: stubborn, brave, non-girlie… an Alice ‘with gravity.’” (Dos Santos). 


Furthermore, in this sequence, the film is perhaps not queering particularly in its cinematography and filmic style; the continuous use of ‘over the shoulder’ and ‘mid shots’ is prominent, with a particular lack of experimental filmic style. Similarly, the typical idea of the Victorian Monarchy is also queered by the Red and White Queens, as it would have been uncommon in the Victorian era to have a woman at the head of the monarchy. Continually, they are direct juxtapositions of each other, being perhaps exaggerated stereotypes of good and evil. This can be seen not only through their classic colour palettes (Red representing evil, and white symbolic of good), but also in their gender representation. Throughout the film, the Red Queen perhaps takes on a more masculine tone, whilst the White Queen presents an exaggerated, almost absurdist, feminine persona. They are direct foils of each other, used to ironically dissect typical roles that women often fall into or, more frequently, are forced into within Hollywood standards.


In the opening of the film, we see Alice being proposed to by Lord Hamish (Leo Bill), an arranged marriage would be common of the time, although Alice again queers social norms by rejecting the potential of a wealthy and stable life “Unfortunately, even in the 21st Century, it is not uncommon for women to feel as though they must sacrifice attraction for a suitor and pleasure in order to fulfil the stereotypical gender-based obligations and marriage scripts that have been beset upon them since well before leaving the womb.” (Compton). In the second film, ‘Alice Through the Looking Glass’, we see her queer these standards further by becoming the ship’s captain, showing she is going against heteronormative pressures put on women at the time. We also later see her rejecting the social norms of masculine power. This can be seen when she first enters Wonderland, thinking it’s a dream: “This is my dream, and I’ll decide where it goes from here.” Here we see Alice taking control of her life; she’s rejecting stereotypical gender roles of the time and goes against external heteronormative pressures of a typical Victorian society. 


However, spanning from the first time she visits Wonderland until the denouement of the film, we see Alice adhering to social pressures within the world of Wonderland. For example, when she first enters Wonderland, she reads the ‘Oraculum’, which is a compendium of the future she must fulfil, detailing her slaying of the ‘Jabberwocky’. Alice is essentially forced into the role of a warrior despite showing her discontent; this is perhaps not queering, as Alice does not have complete control over her life. Even in Wonderland, she is still being forced into a certain role by those more powerful than her. So, although she is to combat societal standards of women, ultimately, there is still a man telling a woman how to adhere to societal norms, just within a different standard of what is normal. In contrast, this can be seen as Alice overcoming her own personal and social struggles as Compton explores ““Hope that each of us has the potential to be empowered to overcome traditional gendered scripts and roll- out our own personal and/or societal Jabberwockies if you will- so that we may live our lives based on equality and equity, rather than on beliefs (ideas?) that are more hierarchical, fear-based, and ultimately potentially harmful.” (Compton) In a sense, this is true as Alice’s role within Wonderland particularly queers the role of women within Victorian society, but despite not ‘slaying’, she still adheres to the societal standards imposed on her in Wonderland. This also queers typical roles within film, of women being saved by the heroic man, as Alice is the hero within the film, stating, “I make the path.” 


Similarly, the film queers typical narratives within Hollywood films of the time, this can be seen through the lack of love interest or romantic narratives. Upon my first viewing of the film, I initially thought there would be a romantic arc between Alice and The Hatter;however, Burton continually queers the typical secondary romantic arc by subverting audience expectations and avoiding a romance plot for Alice and The Hatter. Their relationship is close and intimate, but resists a typical societal label; this lack of explicit categorisation continues the queering narrative throughout the film’s plot, as it is never directly stated to be a romantic relationship.


##Queering Character

Another way in which Burton uses Alice to queer the time period, typical gender roles societal expectations is through the use of morphing. Throughout the film’s duration, Alice changes shape and size multiple times, both shrinking and growing taller as well as assuming numerous new identities, having to fulfil multiple roles. This is perhaps queering as she does not adhere to one specific character archetype but has many different roles as she finds her way through Wonderland, each time having a different significance as the plot develops, this can relate to Halberstam’s theory of ‘Wild Things’, as Alice is not a clear cut character, but is instead many different things as her character develops. “Wildness names simultaneously a chaotic force of nature, the outside of categorisation, unrestrained forms of embodiment, the refusal to submit to social regulations, loss of control, and the unpredictable.” (Halberstam), We see this as Alice partially changes her identity and appearance as the film progresses, showing the Wildness of Wonderland. 



At the opening of the film, we see Alice not knowing her place within Victorian society after the passing of her father and unsure about her arranged marriage. Once entering Wonderland, the secondary characters, such as The Hatter and Dormouse, question if she’s the ‘right Alice’, again, like in the normal world, questioning her place within society. “You’re not hardly Alice.” From a perspective of queering Alice in Wonderland, this could be representative or relatable to those in the audience who are often forced into a category or box. More specifically, the pressure on gender fluid or LGBTQ+ people who feel forced to perhaps pick an identity or specific label. Continually, Alice is repeatedly made to hide her identity or assume another label to fit the world or social expectations, which is also particularly relatable to those within the LGBTQ+ community. “In contrast to events meant to promote positivity among the LGBTQ+ people, other events may increase the desire to keep one’s identity hidden. Prominent among these are violent events targeting the LGBTQ community, such as the 2016 shooting at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida.” (Cisternino, Jones). 


##Queering the World of Wonderland

Another way in which Alice in Wonderland is queering is through the world of Wonderland. It is revealed to the audience that Alice has, in fact, visited Wonderland before, it being a ghost of her past. This is perhaps queering as Wonderland takes on this ghostly or mythical nature, directly juxtaposing the rigid Victorian Society the audience is introduced to at the beginning of the film. “Spectrality is in part, a mode of historicity: it describes the way in which ‘the time is out of joint’; that is, the way the past or the future presses upon us with a kind of insistence or demand, a demand to which we must somehow respond.” (Freccero). This also demonstrates Alice, perhaps taking another form, similar to that of a ghost returning from the past. Freccero later suggests that “those who are buried- perhaps buried alive- will return to haunt us. This melancholic model is also a response to trauma- the trauma of historicity- yet it is a response that will not acknowledge trauma or the loss and seeks instead to hush voices or to ‘understand’ or master them with meaning and discourse.” This could perhaps be in relation to the very world of Wonderland, which is inherently queering as it is a direct opposition to the real world, being upside down and the only mode to travel to it being to fall down a rabbit hole. 



As previously mentioned, the idea of Alice being a multifaceted, mouldable character in changing her size and shape. There are also other characters who have non-normative bodies, for example, ‘Tweedledee’ and ‘Tweedledum’, who have extremely unique and queering character designs, not typical to classic Hollywood character designs, particularly within the ‘family-friendly’ genre.


##Queering Faminial Identities

As well as Queering Alice’s identity, *Alice in Wonderland* also queers the role of family in society, questioning the typical, rigid nuclear-family role. We see Alice at the opening of the film with her mother; it is also revealed later that Alice has an older sister. However, the film begins after Alice’s father’s death, immediately queering the typical family unit often expected by society. “Neither ‘mother’ nor ‘father’ are referenced at any point in her travels or her returns. Throughout both books, Alice refers to her family at home primarily as a discipline-minded but collective ‘they’. ‘They’ may be largely forgotten while Alice explored her fantasy lands, but the idea of family is not. No normative family emerges, however, and every family relation is distorted into a queer configuration.” (Elkin). This particularly queers the Victorian society in which the film is set, as it defies the heteronormative family unit of mother, father and two children, each playing their assigned gender roles.



Similarly,throughout Alice in Wonderland, and the second instalment in the franchise, Alice Through the Looking Glass, we see Alice finding her chosen family, in the form of The Hatter, Dormouse, Tweedledee and Tweedledum. This further queers the idea that there must be a typical family unit of which the man is the head. As previously mentioned, we see Alice rejecting Lord Ascot’s marriage proposal at the opening of the film. This reinforces Alice in Wonderland, rejecting the Victorian family unit at the time, and the standards of having a family, courtship, proposal, marriage (commonly arranged), and then reproduction.


##Conclusion

Overall, the Tim Burton film ‘Alice in Wonderland’, inherently queers Hollywood standards of normative, particularly in genre, time and characterisation. This can be seen as the audience repeatedly witnesses Alice’s character changing both physically and mentally as the story goes on. The film also frequently queer’s audience expectations of narrative by rejecting the idea of a romance arc and traditional family ideals.

**Bibliography**

* The Anarchist Library. (2020). *No Future*. [online] Available at: <https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lee-edelman-no-future> [Accessed 11 Nov. 2025].
* Exeter.ac.uk. (2025). *Sign in to your account*. [online] Available at: <https://ele.exeter.ac.uk/pluginfile.php/4897230/course/section/1759514/Freccero%20-%20Queer-Early-Modern.pdf> [Accessed 11 Nov. 2025].

* HeinOnline. (2021). *About  HeinOnline*. [online] Available at: <https://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/fmlcr17&div=4&id=&page=> [Accessed 11 Nov. 2025].

* Exeter.ac.uk. (2025). *Redirecting*. [online] Available at: <https://ele.exeter.ac.uk/pluginfile.php/4897230/course/section/1759513/Halberstam%20-%20Wild%20Things.pdf> [Accessed 11 Nov. 2025].
* Santos, D.L.V. dos, Eller, E.N. and Santos, I.D.B. dos (2024). Eu faço meu destino: uma análise do marcador social de gênero no filme Alice no País das Maravilhas. *Diálogo com a Economia Criativa*, [online] 9(27), pp.40–56. doi: <https://doi.org/10.22398/2525-2828.092740-56>.
* Google Docs. (n.d.). *Preprint 2020-11-20 Societal Pressures, Safety, and Online Labelling - Investigating LGBTQ Self-Identification in an Online Space.pdf*. [online] Available at: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1w0DdsGDCfWyL37IYTF5ZBRsNh1IfpQwG/view>.

* Compton, D., Blumer, M.L.C. and Boeckmann, R.J. (2011). Alice in Wonderland. *Journal of Feminist Family Therapy*, 23(1), pp.54–59. Doi: <https://doi.org/10.1080/08952833.2011.548707>

‌

